docs: Updates and refactor (#683)
lancedb/lancedb: docs/src/concepts/index_ivfpq.md

# Understanding LanceDB's IVF-PQ index

> An index is a data structure that represents data in a way that makes it more efficient to search and retrieve. Using an index is faster, but less accurate than kNN or brute force search because, in essence, the index is a lossy representation of the data.

Reviewer: Might be worth specifying `ANN` index, since the part about being "less accurate" doesn't apply to other index types (like scalar indices).
```suggestion
An ANN (Approximate Nearest Neighbors) index is a data structure that represents data in a way that makes it more efficient to search and retrieve. Using an ANN index is faster, but less accurate than kNN or brute force search because, in essence, the index is a lossy representation of the data.
```

LanceDB is fundamentally different from other vector databases in that it is built on top of [Lance](https://github.com/lancedb/lance), an open-source columnar data format designed for performant ML workloads and fast random access. Due to the design of Lance, LanceDB's indexing philosophy adopts a primarily *disk-based* indexing philosophy.

## IVF-PQ

IVF-PQ is a composite index that combines inverted file index (IVF) and product quantization (PQ). The implementation in LanceDB provides several parameters to fine-tune the index's size, query throughput, latency and recall, which are described later in this section.

### Product quantization

Quantization is a compression technique used to reduce the dimensionality of an embedding to speed up search. 

> ![](../assets/ivfpq_quantization.webp)

Reviewer: It's unclear what this image is showing. What is the yellow versus blue? What is `S` and `D`?

Author: You're right, it's unclear. The figure here doesn't really help illustrate the point we're trying to make, so I've removed this and updated the PQ figure per your feedback below.

Product quantization (PQ) works by dividing a large, high-dimensional vector of size into equally sized subvectors. Each subvector is assigned a "reproduction value" that maps to the nearest centroid of points for that subvector. The reproduction values are then assigned to a codebook using unique IDs, which can be used to reconstruct the original vector.

> ![](../assets/ivfpq_pq_desc.webp)

Reviewer: Again, it's unclear what each of these symbols mean. Perhaps you can illustrate the example described below concretely.

Here's a sketch of how I might do it:

![pq_diagram](https://github.com/lancedb/lancedb/assets/5488879/6f2eecf0-7c94-4be3-97ec-974328e91ee9)

Author: Great point, addressed in the new version!

It's important to remember that quantization is a *lossy process*, i.e., the reconstructed vector is not identical to the original vector. This results in a trade-off between the size of the index and the accuracy of the search results.

> As an example, consider a starting 128-dimensional vector consisting of 32-bit floats. Quantizing it to an 8-bit integer vector with **only 8 dimensions**, we can cause a significant reduction in memory requirements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As an example, consider a starting 128-dimensional vector consisting of 32-bit floats. Quantizing it to an 8-bit integer vector with **only 8 dimensions**, we can significantly reduce memory requirements.
```

In IVF, the PQ vector space is divided into *Voronoi cells*, which are essentially partitions that consist of all the points in the space that are within a threshold distance of the given region's seed point. These seed points are used to create an inverted index that correlates each centroid with a list of vectors in the space, allowing a search to be restricted to just a subset of vectors in the index.

![](../assets/ivfpq_ivf_desc.webp)

During query time, depending on where the query lands in vector space, it may be close to the border of multiple Voronoi cells, which could make the top-k results ambiguous and span across multiple cells. To address this, the IVF-PQ introduces the `nprobe` parameter, which controls the number of Voronoi cells to search during a query. The higher the `nprobe`, the more accurate the results, but the slower the query.

![](../assets/ivfpq_query_vector.webp)

## Putting it all together

We can combine the above concepts to understand how to build and query an IVF-PQ index in LanceDB.

> ### Construct index

Reviewer: I think we could say a little more in this part, telling how we decided the `num_partitions` and `num_sub_vectors` parameters. `num_partitions` is usually chosen to target a particular number of vectors per partition. `num_sub_vectors` will likely depend on the desired recall and dimensionality of the vector.

Author: I've added the details on how we choose these values and some best practices in the FAQs section from the old docs.
